---
title: Sudden Unexpected Infant Death in Cook County, IL from 2015-2019
keywords:
- markdown
- publishing
- manubot
- public_health
lang: en-US
date-meta: '2022-07-11'
author-meta:
- Daniel P. Riggins
- Huiyuan Zhang
- William E. Trick
header-includes: |-
  <!--
  Manubot generated metadata rendered from header-includes-template.html.
  Suggest improvements at https://github.com/manubot/manubot/blob/main/manubot/process/header-includes-template.html
  -->
  <meta name="dc.format" content="text/html" />
  <meta name="dc.title" content="Sudden Unexpected Infant Death in Cook County, IL from 2015-2019" />
  <meta name="citation_title" content="Sudden Unexpected Infant Death in Cook County, IL from 2015-2019" />
  <meta property="og:title" content="Sudden Unexpected Infant Death in Cook County, IL from 2015-2019" />
  <meta property="twitter:title" content="Sudden Unexpected Infant Death in Cook County, IL from 2015-2019" />
  <meta name="dc.date" content="2022-07-11" />
  <meta name="citation_publication_date" content="2022-07-11" />
  <meta name="dc.language" content="en-US" />
  <meta name="citation_language" content="en-US" />
  <meta name="dc.relation.ispartof" content="Manubot" />
  <meta name="dc.publisher" content="Manubot" />
  <meta name="citation_journal_title" content="Manubot" />
  <meta name="citation_technical_report_institution" content="Manubot" />
  <meta name="citation_author" content="Daniel P. Riggins" />
  <meta name="citation_author_institution" content="Section of Preventive Medicine, Cook County Health" />
  <meta name="citation_author_institution" content="Program in Public Health, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University" />
  <meta name="citation_author_orcid" content="0000-0002-6240-6212" />
  <meta name="twitter:creator" content="@DanRiggins" />
  <meta name="citation_author" content="Huiyuan Zhang" />
  <meta name="citation_author_institution" content="Center for Health Equity and Inclusion, Cook County Health" />
  <meta name="citation_author" content="William E. Trick" />
  <meta name="citation_author_institution" content="Center for Health Equity and Inclusion, Cook County Health" />
  <meta name="citation_author_orcid" content="0000-0002-3243-5098" />
  <link rel="canonical" href="https://andtheWings.github.io/cook_county_suid_manuscript/" />
  <meta property="og:url" content="https://andtheWings.github.io/cook_county_suid_manuscript/" />
  <meta property="twitter:url" content="https://andtheWings.github.io/cook_county_suid_manuscript/" />
  <meta name="citation_fulltext_html_url" content="https://andtheWings.github.io/cook_county_suid_manuscript/" />
  <meta name="citation_pdf_url" content="https://andtheWings.github.io/cook_county_suid_manuscript/manuscript.pdf" />
  <link rel="alternate" type="application/pdf" href="https://andtheWings.github.io/cook_county_suid_manuscript/manuscript.pdf" />
  <link rel="alternate" type="text/html" href="https://andtheWings.github.io/cook_county_suid_manuscript/v/e22feb05e2c625f86ca05c932d90a61b66ad4e73/" />
  <meta name="manubot_html_url_versioned" content="https://andtheWings.github.io/cook_county_suid_manuscript/v/e22feb05e2c625f86ca05c932d90a61b66ad4e73/" />
  <meta name="manubot_pdf_url_versioned" content="https://andtheWings.github.io/cook_county_suid_manuscript/v/e22feb05e2c625f86ca05c932d90a61b66ad4e73/manuscript.pdf" />
  <meta property="og:type" content="article" />
  <meta property="twitter:card" content="summary_large_image" />
  <link rel="icon" type="image/png" sizes="192x192" href="https://manubot.org/favicon-192x192.png" />
  <link rel="mask-icon" href="https://manubot.org/safari-pinned-tab.svg" color="#ad1457" />
  <meta name="theme-color" content="#ad1457" />
  <!-- end Manubot generated metadata -->
bibliography:
- content/manual-references.json
manubot-output-bibliography: output/references.json
manubot-output-citekeys: output/citations.tsv
manubot-requests-cache-path: ci/cache/requests-cache
manubot-clear-requests-cache: false
...






<small><em>
This manuscript
([permalink](https://andtheWings.github.io/cook_county_suid_manuscript/v/e22feb05e2c625f86ca05c932d90a61b66ad4e73/))
was automatically generated
from [andtheWings/cook_county_suid_manuscript@e22feb0](https://github.com/andtheWings/cook_county_suid_manuscript/tree/e22feb05e2c625f86ca05c932d90a61b66ad4e73)
on July 11, 2022.
</em></small>

## Authors



+ **Daniel P. Riggins**
  ^[✉](#correspondence)^<br>
    ![ORCID icon](images/orcid.svg){.inline_icon width=16 height=16}
    [0000-0002-6240-6212](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6240-6212)
    · ![GitHub icon](images/github.svg){.inline_icon width=16 height=16}
    [andtheWings](https://github.com/andtheWings)
    · ![Twitter icon](images/twitter.svg){.inline_icon width=16 height=16}
    [DanRiggins](https://twitter.com/DanRiggins)<br>
  <small>
     Section of Preventive Medicine, Cook County Health; Program in Public Health, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University
     · Funded by none
  </small>

+ **Huiyuan Zhang**
  <br><br>
  <small>
     Center for Health Equity and Inclusion, Cook County Health
  </small>

+ **William E. Trick**
  <br>
    ![ORCID icon](images/orcid.svg){.inline_icon width=16 height=16}
    [0000-0002-3243-5098](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3243-5098)<br>
  <small>
     Center for Health Equity and Inclusion, Cook County Health
  </small>


::: {#correspondence}
✉ — Correspondence possible via [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/andtheWings/cook_county_suid_manuscript/issues)
or email to
Daniel P. Riggins \<daniel.riggins@protonmail.com\>.


:::


## Abstract

BACKGROUND: Although overall rates of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
(SIDS) are declining, significant racial disparities persist in many
metropolitan areas, including Cook County, IL. In some areas, public
health campaigns have successfully reduced SIDS through promotion of
safe sleep practices. To correct these disparities, public health
practitioners might benefit from guidance to specific high-risk
neighborhoods to precisely target interventions within Cook County’s
large geographic breadth.

METHODS: We used geocoded medical examiner data and manual review of
death records to identify SIDS events and locations. We characterized
the demographics of SIDS, sought to identify specific clusters of census
tracts in the county where SIDS has been most prevalent, and modeled
prevalence based on census-level ecologic factors obtained from the
census bureau. We hypothesized that regions with greatest prevalence
would follow patterns of historic racial segregation and that factors
reflecting elevated levels of socioeconomic disadvantage would have high
utility in the model.

RESULTS: Demographic analysis revealed that infant mortality due to SIDS
had a much higher proportion of Black individuals (70%) than Cook
County’s children overall (25%). Mapping confirmed that SIDS mortality
was most concentrated in historically disinvested portions of the West
and South Sides of the county, specifically in Chicago neighborhoods
like Englewood, Humboldt Park, and Pullman as well as suburbs like
Chicago Heights, Harvey, and Matteson. Our model included the following
variables: number of residents under age five, percent of residents on
public insurance, number of opioid overdose deaths, and percent of
residents self-identifying as Black. The model was able to accurately
retrodict whether census tracts had or had not contained SIDS deaths,
but it was not flexible enough to enumerate the number of deaths in a
tract if that was any greater than a count of 2.

CONCLUSIONS: Clinicians and public health practitioners should
concentrate preventive efforts against SIDS in the specific geographic
areas listed above. We shall explore why certain neighborhoods fared
better or worse than expected by our model in order to identify
additional harmful or protective factors. We intend to involve
individuals and organizations from the Black community in the design of
future interventions.


## Case Characteristics

Our automated method for identifying cases of SUID from medical examiner
archives generated 333 prospective cases. After comparison with the gold
standard list of cases identified via manual review by a panel of
experts, we added XXX cases and removed XXX cases (Table XXX). There
were XXX cases not originally identified by manual review that we still
deemed to be valid. This process yielded XXX valid SUID cases in total.

We tabulated descriptive characteristics for valid SUID cases (Table
XXX). We compared the distributions of select characteristics compared
to those in the overall population of Cook County children under the age
of 5 (derived from the census). SUID cases had a higher prevalence of
Black infants and favored location in Chicago (vs. Cook County Suburbs)
compared to the reference population.

## Census Tract Aggregate Characteristics

We tabulated characteristics of census tracts that had at least one case
of SUID versus those that did not (Table XXX). Census tracts with at
least one case of SUID appeared to have higher proportions of black
people, XXX and lower proportions of XXX.


## Supplement 1 - Analytic Pipeline

### Pipeline Overview

    library(targets)

DPR orchestrated the data pipeline for the primary data analysis with
the package {[targets](https://docs.ropensci.org/targets/)}.

If working with this repository and you want a visual overview of the
pipeline, you can execute:

    tar_visnetwork()

Here is information on the R session and its dependencies:

    sessionInfo()

    ## R version 4.2.1 (2022-06-23)
    ## Platform: x86_64-pc-linux-gnu (64-bit)
    ## Running under: Pop!_OS 22.04 LTS
    ## 
    ## Matrix products: default
    ## BLAS:   /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/openblas-pthread/libblas.so.3
    ## LAPACK: /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/openblas-pthread/libopenblasp-r0.3.20.so
    ## 
    ## locale:
    ##  [1] LC_CTYPE=en_US.UTF-8       LC_NUMERIC=C               LC_TIME=en_US.UTF-8       
    ##  [4] LC_COLLATE=en_US.UTF-8     LC_MONETARY=en_US.UTF-8    LC_MESSAGES=en_US.UTF-8   
    ##  [7] LC_PAPER=en_US.UTF-8       LC_NAME=C                  LC_ADDRESS=C              
    ## [10] LC_TELEPHONE=C             LC_MEASUREMENT=en_US.UTF-8 LC_IDENTIFICATION=C       
    ## 
    ## attached base packages:
    ## [1] stats     graphics  grDevices utils     datasets  methods   base     
    ## 
    ## other attached packages:
    ##  [1] rmarkdown_2.14   knitr_1.39       lubridate_1.8.0  tidycensus_1.2.2
    ##  [5] sf_1.0-7         forcats_0.5.1    stringr_1.4.0    dplyr_1.0.9     
    ##  [9] purrr_0.3.4      readr_2.1.2      tidyr_1.2.0      tibble_3.1.7    
    ## [13] ggplot2_3.3.6    tidyverse_1.3.1  targets_0.12.1  
    ## 
    ## loaded via a namespace (and not attached):
    ##  [1] fs_1.5.2            webshot_0.5.3       httr_1.4.3          tools_4.2.1        
    ##  [5] backports_1.4.1     utf8_1.2.2          rgdal_1.5-32        R6_2.5.1           
    ##  [9] KernSmooth_2.23-20  DBI_1.1.3           colorspace_2.0-3    withr_2.5.0        
    ## [13] sp_1.5-0            tidyselect_1.1.2    processx_3.7.0      curl_4.3.2         
    ## [17] compiler_4.2.1      cli_3.3.0           rvest_1.0.2         gt_0.6.0           
    ## [21] xml2_1.3.3          sass_0.4.1          scales_1.2.0        checkmate_2.1.0    
    ## [25] classInt_0.4-7      corrr_0.4.3         callr_3.7.0         proxy_0.4-27       
    ## [29] rappdirs_0.3.3      commonmark_1.8.0    digest_0.6.29       foreign_0.8-82     
    ## [33] pkgconfig_2.0.3     htmltools_0.5.2     highr_0.9           dbplyr_2.2.1       
    ## [37] fastmap_1.1.0       htmlwidgets_1.5.4   rlang_1.0.3         readxl_1.4.0       
    ## [41] rstudioapi_0.13     visNetwork_2.1.0    generics_0.1.3      jsonlite_1.8.0     
    ## [45] magrittr_2.0.3      Rcpp_1.0.8.3        munsell_0.5.0       fansi_1.0.3        
    ## [49] lifecycle_1.0.1     stringi_1.7.6       yaml_2.3.5          gtsummary_1.6.1    
    ## [53] snakecase_0.11.0    grid_4.2.1          maptools_1.1-4      promises_1.2.0.1   
    ## [57] crayon_1.5.1        lattice_0.20-45     haven_2.5.0         chromote_0.1.0     
    ## [61] hms_1.1.1           ps_1.7.1            pillar_1.7.0        igraph_1.3.2       
    ## [65] uuid_1.1-0          base64url_1.4       codetools_0.2-18    reprex_2.0.1       
    ## [69] glue_1.6.2          evaluate_0.15       data.table_1.14.2   broom.helpers_1.8.0
    ## [73] modelr_0.1.8        vctrs_0.4.1         tzdb_0.3.0          cellranger_1.1.0   
    ## [77] webshot2_0.1.0      gtable_0.3.0        assertthat_0.2.1    xfun_0.31          
    ## [81] janitor_2.1.0       broom_1.0.0         e1071_1.7-11        later_1.3.0        
    ## [85] class_7.3-20        websocket_1.4.1     tigris_1.6.1        units_0.8-0        
    ## [89] ellipsis_0.3.2


### Ingestion

At time of primary analysis, DPR combined a data file generated by
collaborator HZ and additional data pulled via the R package
{[tidycensus](https://walker-data.com/tidycensus/index.html)}.

DPR imported HZ’s excel file into the Targets pipeline using the
function `readxl::read_xls()`. He pulled from the tidycensus API using
his function `get_suid_from_tidycensus()`. This function asks for
variables from the American Community Survey’s 5-year estimate for
2015-2019. The variables describe count of total population, count of
population under age 5 years, average number of people per household,
and geospatial shape of census tracts in Cook County, IL. The function
also does some reshaping of data as noted in the code comments below:

    ## function() {
    ##     
    ##     df1 <-
    ##         # Call the census API
    ##         tidycensus::get_acs(
    ##             geography = "tract",
    ##             variables = c(
    ##                 "B01003_001", # TOTAL POPULATION
    ##                 "B06001_002",  # Total Under 5 years
    ##                 "B25010_001" # AVERAGE HOUSEHOLD SIZE OF OCCUPIED HOUSING UNITS
    ##             ),
    ##             state = "IL", # Illinois
    ##             county = 031, # Cook County
    ##             geometry = TRUE # Import census tract polygons too
    ##         ) |> 
    ##         st_transform(crs = 4326) |> 
    ##         # Drop margin of estimate and name variables
    ##         select(-moe, -NAME) |>
    ##         # Convert GEOID to numeric type
    ##         mutate(
    ##             GEOID = as.numeric(GEOID)
    ##         ) |>
    ##         # Reshape variable estimates into separate columns
    ##         tidyr::pivot_wider(
    ##             names_from = variable,
    ##             values_from = estimate
    ##         ) |>
    ##         # Clean names for consistency
    ##         rename(
    ##             fips = GEOID,
    ##             pop_total = B01003_001,
    ##             pop_under_five = B06001_002,
    ##             avg_peop_per_household = B25010_001
    ##         ) |> 
    ##         # Put geometry column at the end of the table
    ##         relocate(
    ##             geometry,
    ##             .after = avg_peop_per_household
    ##         ) |> 
    ##         st_as_sf()
    ##     
    ##     return(df1)
    ## }

DPR combined the two data sources with his function `assemble_suid()`,
which performs a left join on FIPS ID for observations from HZ’s excel
data, then does some wrangling around naming conventions, adds a boolean
variable for whether SUID is present in a given tract, and rounds
estimates to the first decimal point for consistency:

    ## function(suid_from_internal_raw_df, suid_from_tidycensus_raw_sf) {
    ##     
    ##     df1 <- 
    ##         left_join(
    ##             suid_from_internal_raw_df,
    ##             suid_from_tidycensus_raw_sf,
    ##             by = c("FIPS" = "fips")
    ##         ) |>
    ##         clean_names() |> 
    ##         # Rename variables for consistency
    ##         rename(
    ##             suid_count = count_asphyxia,
    ##             foreign_born = pe_foreignborn,
    ##             married_males = pe_marriedmales,
    ##             married_females = pe_marriedfemales,
    ##             divorced_widowed_males = pedivorcewidowedmale,
    ##             divorced_widowed_females = pedivorcewidowedfemale,
    ##             lt_high_school = pelessthanhighschool,
    ##             high_school_diploma = highschooldiploma,
    ##             some_college = somecollege,
    ##             college_diploma = collegediploma,
    ##             employed = percent_enployed,
    ##             income_lt_10 = incomelt10,
    ##             income_lt_25 = incomelt25,
    ##             income_lt_50 = incomelt50,
    ##             income_lt_75 = incomelt75,
    ##             income_gt_75 = incomegt75,
    ##             private_insurance = privateinsurance,
    ##             public_insurance = publicinsurance,
    ##             no_insurance = noinsurance
    ##         ) |> 
    ##         # Add new variables
    ##         mutate(
    ##             # Binary variable on whether suid is present in a tract
    ##             suid_present = case_when(
    ##                 suid_count > 0 ~ TRUE,
    ##                 TRUE ~ FALSE
    ##             ),
    ##             suid_count_factor = factor(
    ##                 case_when(
    ##                     suid_count == 0 ~ "No Deaths",
    ##                     suid_count == 1 ~ "One Death",
    ##                     suid_count == 2 ~ "Two Deaths",
    ##                     suid_count == 3 ~ "Three Deaths",
    ##                     suid_count == 4 ~ "Four Deaths",
    ##                     suid_count == 5 ~ "Five Deaths",
    ##                     suid_count > 5 ~ "Six+ Deaths"
    ##                 ),
    ##                 ordered = TRUE,
    ##                 levels = c(
    ##                     "No Deaths", 
    ##                     "One Death", 
    ##                     "Two Deaths", 
    ##                     "Three Deaths", 
    ##                     "Four Deaths", 
    ##                     "Five Deaths", 
    ##                     "Six+ Deaths"
    ##                 )
    ##             ),
    ##             across(
    ##                 .cols = starts_with("svi_"),
    ##                 .fns = ~ round((.x * 100), digits = 1)
    ##             )
    ##         ) |> 
    ##         st_as_sf()
    ##     
    ##     return(df1)
    ## }


### Mapping

DPR generated maps using the
{[leaflet](https://rstudio.github.io/leaflet/)} package ecosystem in R.
His function `make_suid_count_map()`, makes a chloropleth map that
overlays onto CartoDB basemap tiles and colors census tracts with a
{[viridis](https://sjmgarnier.github.io/viridis/index.html)}-derived
palette.

    ## function(suid_sf) {
    ##     
    ##     # Configure color palette
    ##     suid_palette <- 
    ##         leaflet::colorFactor(
    ##             palette = "magma",
    ##             reverse = TRUE,
    ##             levels = c(
    ##                 "No Deaths", 
    ##                 "One Death", 
    ##                 "Two Deaths", 
    ##                 "Three Deaths", 
    ##                 "Four Deaths", 
    ##                 "Five Deaths", 
    ##                 "Six+ Deaths"
    ##             )
    ##         )
    ##     
    ##     obj1 <-
    ##         # Assign map to a widget object
    ##         leaflet(suid_sf) |>
    ##             # Use CartoDB's background tiles
    ##             addProviderTiles("CartoDB.Positron") |>
    ##             # Center and zoom the map to Cook County
    ##             setView(lat = 41.816544, lng = -87.749500, zoom = 9) |>
    ##             # Add button to enable fullscreen map
    ##             leaflet.extras::addFullscreenControl() |>
    ##             # Add census tract polygons colored to reflect the number of deaths
    ##             addPolygons(
    ##                 # No borders to the polygons, just fill
    ##                 stroke = FALSE,
    ##                 # Color according to palette above
    ##                 color = ~ suid_palette(suid_count_factor),
    ##                 # Group polygons by number of deaths for use in the layer control
    ##                 group = ~ suid_count_factor,
    ##                 # Make slightly transparent
    ##                 fillOpacity = 0.5,
    ##                 # Click on the polygon to get its ID
    ##                 popup = ~ paste0("<b>FIPS ID:</b> ", as.character(fips))
    ##             ) |>
    ##             #Add legend
    ##             addLegend(
    ##                 title = "Count of SUID <br> per census tract <br> in Cook County, IL <br> from 2015-2019",
    ##                 values = ~ suid_count_factor,
    ##                 pal = suid_palette,
    ##                 position = "topright"
    ##             ) |>
    ##             # Add ability to toggle each factor grouping on or off the map
    ##             addLayersControl(
    ##                 overlayGroups = c(
    ##                     "No Deaths", 
    ##                     "One Death", 
    ##                     "Two Deaths", 
    ##                     "Three Deaths", 
    ##                     "Four Deaths", 
    ##                     "Five Deaths", 
    ##                     "Six+ Deaths"
    ##                 ),
    ##                 position = "topleft"
    ##             )
    ##     
    ##     return(obj1)
    ##     
    ## }


## References {.page_break_before}

<!-- Explicitly insert bibliography here -->
<div id="refs"></div>
