## Abstract

BACKGROUND: Although overall rates of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
(SIDS) are declining, significant racial disparities persist in many
metropolitan areas, including Cook County, IL. In some areas, public
health campaigns have successfully reduced SIDS through promotion of
safe sleep practices. To correct these disparities, public health
practitioners might benefit from guidance to specific high-risk
neighborhoods to precisely target interventions within Cook County’s
large geographic breadth.

METHODS: We used geocoded medical examiner data and manual review of
death records to identify SIDS events and locations. We characterized
the demographics of SIDS, sought to identify specific clusters of census
tracts in the county where SIDS has been most prevalent, and modeled
prevalence based on census-level ecologic factors obtained from the
census bureau. We hypothesized that regions with greatest prevalence
would follow patterns of historic racial segregation and that factors
reflecting elevated levels of socioeconomic disadvantage would have high
utility in the model.

RESULTS: Demographic analysis revealed that infant mortality due to SIDS
had a much higher proportion of Black individuals (70%) than Cook
County’s children overall (25%). Mapping confirmed that SIDS mortality
was most concentrated in historically disinvested portions of the West
and South Sides of the county, specifically in Chicago neighborhoods
like Englewood, Humboldt Park, and Pullman as well as suburbs like
Chicago Heights, Harvey, and Matteson. Our model included the following
variables: number of residents under age five, percent of residents on
public insurance, number of opioid overdose deaths, and percent of
residents self-identifying as Black. The model was able to accurately
retrodict whether census tracts had or had not contained SIDS deaths,
but it was not flexible enough to enumerate the number of deaths in a
tract if that was any greater than a count of 2.

COUNCLUSIONS: Clinicians and public health practitioners should
concentrate preventive efforts against SIDS in the specific geographic
areas listed above. We shall explore why certain neighborhoods fared
better or worse than expected by our model in order to identify
additional harmful or protective factors. We intend to involve
individuals and organizations from the Black community in the design of
future interventions.
